			It is the 41st millennium. For more than a hundred centuries the Emperor has sat immobile on the Golden Throne of Earth. He is the Master of Mankind by the will of the gods, and master of a million worlds by the might of His inexhaustible armies. He is a rotting carcass writhing invisibly with power from the Dark Age of Technology. He is the Carrion Lord of the Imperium for whom a thousand souls are sacrificed every day, so that He may never truly die.

			Yet even in His deathless state, the Emperor continues His eternal vigilance. Mighty battlefleets cross the daemon-infested miasma of the warp, the only route between distant stars, their way lit by the Astronomican, the psychic manifestation of the Emperor’s will. Vast armies give battle in His name on uncounted worlds. Greatest amongst His soldiers are the Adeptus Astartes, the Space Marines, bio-engineered super-warriors. Their comrades in arms are legion: the Astra Militarum and countless planetary defence forces, the ever-vigilant Inquisition and the tech-priests of the Adeptus Mechanicus to name only a few. But for all their multitudes, they are barely enough to hold off the ever-present threat from aliens, heretics, mutants – and worse.

			To be a man in such times is to be one amongst untold billions. It is to live in the cruellest and most bloody regime imaginable. These are the tales of those times. Forget the power of technology and science, for so much has been forgotten, never to be re-learned. Forget the promise of progress and understanding, for in the grim dark future there is only war. There is no peace amongst the stars, only an eternity of carnage and slaughter, and the laughter of thirsting gods.





Come, let me tell you the woes of the soldier, and how many are his superiors: the general, the troop-commander, the officer who leads, the standard-bearer, the lieutenant, the scribe, the commander of fifty, and the garrison-captain. He is awakened at any hour. He toils until the disc of the sun sets in his darkness of night. He is hungry, his belly hurts; he is dead while yet alive.

			– Fragmentary text from the archive of the Logos Historica Verita, attributed to Wenemdiamun, Scribe of Ancient Gyptus on Terra.





One


			‘Remember Yama, old friend?’ said the nemesor, with a wistful sigh. ‘Those blasted swamps… eating bugs… wading through filth… but we made what we could of things, eh? Messy as it was, I sometimes think we were our best selves back then.’

			Vargard Obyron grunted: the barest reply, like the grating of shifted stone. Stars had lived and died in the time since he had bothered to verbally acknowledge his master’s reminiscing.

			‘Too many think war to be a matter of will,’ Zahndrekh continued, gesturing at the fire-streaked sky beyond the capital barge, as if addressing a crowd only he could see. He might have been, for all Obyron knew.

			‘And indeed, Yama was a battle of wills, was it not? Ours, and that of the separatists… a great contest to see who could stick it out for longest.’ The nemesor sighed again, although no breath moved from his body. ‘But will alone does not make a warrior, Obyron! We could have seized Yama in days, had we fought dirty – and the enemy could have held it for years, had they not conceded when honour demanded. But then, who would any of us have been afterwards, eh? Will without honour is nothing, I’m afraid. And I’m beginning to wonder if our current foe, clinging senselessly to the threshold of defeat as they are, has forgotten that spirit of honour.’

			It went on and on. Obyron’s eyes could not close, but he dulled his oculars and his auditory transducers for a moment, in what passed for brief respite. With the nemesor just an indistinct blur, and his voice reduced to a muted drone, it was almost as if they were back on Yama, when these same interminable sermons had seemed fresh and inspiring. For that short moment, Obyron felt a glimmer of what might have been longing, but was probably just sadness. No matter. To feel anything, these days, was bliss.

			But then a bloom of fire in the middle distance snapped his senses back to perfection, and the feeling was snatched away. They were, after all, a long way from Yama now.

			An enemy bulk lifter, lumbering to reinforce the front line, was dying. Hammered by the Sautekh guns, its primitive shields had collapsed all along one side, exposing its fragile hull for a fraction of a second. That was all it took. Turning at speeds that would have collapsed the innards of a mortal pilot, a trio of Night Scythes broke off from their attack run on the enemy guns, locked into a new formation, and screamed towards the stricken lifter. The crescent-shaped fighter craft fell into a tight spiral as their guns charged, leaving a triple helix of superheated exhaust in their wake, then spat their lightning at point-blank range. The shots set off a chain of explosions down the giant vessel’s flank, and it listed to one side with a thunderous groan.

			‘Ha!’ cried Zahndrekh, rising from his command throne. ‘A fine blow struck! A cheer for our pilots!’ There was no answer. The retinue of lychguard on the capital barge just stared ahead, death’s-head faceplates flickering with reflected fire, as their nemesor rambled on. And below them, labouring across the plain in a tide one million strong, the soldiery marched. Skeletal figures plated in lustreless silver, their oculars aglow with dull green fire, they did not so much as raise their heads as the leviathan ruptured.

			This was, Obyron supposed, what passed for glory now. After three years of campaigning, they were on the brink of seizing this system from its usurpers, and adding another star to the domain of the Stormlord. The enemy – the deranged human machine cult calling themselves the Adeptus Mechanicus – had put up a ferocious defence, but had finally been beaten to their knees. The nemesor’s legions were now just fifteen leagues from their primary forge, and while the advance had stalled on this plain for days, victory was inevitable. Under Zahndrekh’s orders – regardless of the depth of the madness from which they rose – it always was.

			Obyron surveyed the sprawling plain below them, making a mental inventory of what they had left to destroy. There wasn’t much. He might not have had Zahndrekh’s eye for the flow of a battlefield, but he certainly knew the edge of defeat when he saw it.

			Most of the machine cult’s credible assets were gone by now. On the horizon behind them stood a line of wrecks: a trio of the superheavy walkers the humans called Knights, which had strode proudly from the forge gates to meet the invaders, only to have their engines cooked off at range by the nemesor’s artillery. They hadn’t even got close enough to fire a shot of their own, and now their ruins were surrounded by the oncoming Sautekh reinforcements, like islands in a river of molten lead.

			What war engines the enemy still possessed were clustered together on a distant ridge, a desperate rabble of ancient guns, coughing out the last of their shells under columns of smoke. Under constant assault from Night Scythes, their crackling shields were shrinking by the minute, popping one by one as their generators gave up. It was only a matter of time before they failed entirely, leaving the lumbering cannons next to helpless.

			But still, the Mechanicus had not given up. Indeed, they were still forging weapons for the fight. Behind the teeming trenches of the enemy infantry, a steel river of their own stretched all the way to the forge-city’s ferrocrete walls: four-legged walkers, hulls still steaming from the assembly line, marching straight from the foundry into carnage. The doomed endeavour was admirable in its way – almost a crude imitation of their own ability to recall troops for redeployment. But doomed it was, as it would never be enough to replace losses.

			With so little left in the field, the last dregs of the humans’ armoury – all the exotic relics – were now being ferried to the front by transports like the one now slowly collapsing from the sky. A huge tracked thing, almost as large as the lifter that had carried it, had been flown in the previous day – but it had immediately broken down, and been pounded into slag by a bombing run, even as its crew had swarmed over its flanks waving censers.

			Since then, not a single lifter had made it within a league of the front without being downed, as the enemy no longer had any combat aircraft with which to contest Sautekh air superiority. The craft now foundering – presumably their last, as it was their largest – had only got as far as it had by virtue of its sheer size.

			In the end, for all their pathetic toys, and their obsession with machines, the humans were forced to rely on flesh. Virtually all that stood between them and the capital now were the toiling legions of the Mechanicus’ skitarii, their red robes blackened to the colour of bruises under this world’s fierce blue sunlight. Their weapons sparked and burned their bearers, and their bodies were riddled with radiation damage, either from the miserable world itself, or from their own cantankerous technology. Why, Obyron wondered, would they seek to become one with machinery, when this is what it did to them? Catching the irony of his own thoughts, Obyron grunted in an approximation of a grim laugh. Yes: the humans ought to be careful what they wished for.

			Despite all the warped symmetries between the cultists and their conquerors, however, the humans were worse than Zahndrekh’s forces at absolutely everything – except perishing. They were, at least, quite good at that.

			There was always room for surprises, however. A shift in the tone of the dying lifter’s engines triggered the vargard’s circumspection protocols, and he found his hand moving to his warscythe as he realised what the humans were doing. Zahndrekh was already ahead of him.

			‘Blood and starfire!’ bellowed the nemesor, thrusting his staff towards the vessel. ‘The dogs are steaming ahead!’ And sure enough, they were. Rather than attempting a controlled landing as it fell from the sky, the bulk lifter was picking up speed, plunging forwards with all power driven to its crude engines. On its current heading, it would strike the heart of the Sautekh lines right beneath the nemesor’s barge. It was a very… human stratagem.

			Obyron ran a rapid divination on likely debris trajectories, but found no threat the barge’s shields could not handle. Still, the impact would likely wipe out most of the thirteenth decurion, and necessitate hours of close-quarters fighting with whatever troops survived the crash. As the lifter’s prow dipped towards the trudging horde – who still did not even raise their heads – Obyron readied his blade.

			For long minutes after the impact, all was dust and smoke and thunder. Zahndrekh was an indistinct figure in the cloud, raging at the foe’s impropriety in between bouts of coughing and spluttering. Obyron’s curiosity had long since died on the matter of his lord’s respiratory affectations, but he still found them tremendously irritating.

			Right now, though, his mind was on other things. Down below, in the ruined ground surrounding the lifter’s carcass, there were new shapes moving in the smoke. Huge, bulbous constructs, they waded from a ragged hole in the transport’s side, bleating out the weird, strident code-songs of their masters. Although armed crudely with solid munitions, they were making quick work of the first phalanxes to move into the impact zone. Zahndrekh barked in frustration, wafting dust from his oculars despite their capacity to see in a thousand arcane spectra.

			‘Obyron, old fellow, your eyes are sharper than mine – tell me, what’s that blasted racket? What do you see down there?’

			‘The engines they call robots, my nemesor,’ replied Obyron. ‘We faced them before, on the fifth world of the system.’

			‘Robots? Pah!’ spat Nemesor Zahndrekh in disgust. ‘How unsporting, to field soulless machines against necrontyr!’

			Of course, Zahndrekh himself – as well as Obyron, and every one of the soldiers below – was a soulless machine. They had been so long enough to see mountains worn to sand. But the nemesor either could not – or would not – see it. Once again, the vargard weighed the urge to correct his master against the certain knowledge he would be ignored, and decided against it. And once again, he looked for the opportunity to channel his frustration through his blade.

			‘Shall I translate down and see to them, lord?’ asked Obyron, using the tone he reserved for those moments when he wished to gently prompt an order from his master. But Zahndrekh gave a dry, grating chuckle, and held out a palm to stay him.

			‘Not so fast – there’ll be no need for my noble vargard to dull his blade on these unworthy hulks. Your place is not always in the fray, oh eager servant! And besides,’ he added, encompassing the silent lychguard with a sweep of his staff, ‘without your company, I’ll have only these taciturn dullards to watch the sport with. No, Obyron, stay with me.’

			And so Obyron stayed, and watched the fight play out, as his nemesor held forth on the poor manners of fielding machines in place of living troops. It was maddening – but it got worse. As the enemy’s shock troops rushed forwards to the wreck, consolidating the toehold the robots had won them, Zahndrekh began talking about how pleasant the weather was. The radiation from the world’s swollen blue star was so fierce as to make even the ancient home world seem benign, and would have curdled an unarmoured body in hours, yet Zahndrekh registered it as balmy sunshine.

			By the time his master finally began to ruminate on the issue of driving back the enemy, Obyron had resorted to inspecting the capital barge via its maintenance scarabs, hoping to find some minor imperfection to put right. In truth, he was bored. One by one, he projected into the beetling constructs via ocular scry, peering through their optics in search of some error in calibration, but found nothing. Every soldier was in perfect condition, every surface spotless. The whole length of the barge was still, like a garden of dead statuary.

			Then something moved.

			It was only a flicker, and only for a few thousandths of a second, but to his vargard’s instinct it may as well have been a solar flare. There, against the mass of glyph-carved stonework at the barge’s stern – a shape. A human form: an assassin.

			While Obyron had not yet encountered a baseline human capable of seriously challenging him in single combat, specimens such as this were at least good sport. If he had possessed a heart, it would have raced in readiness – this might not turn out to be such a tedious day after all. But while his reflexes screamed for him to turn and activate his blade, he remained still, and kept watch via the scarab’s oculars. Excitement was no excuse for poor form – it would be best to let the mortal get closer, within range for a quick kill.

			As the vargard waited, the truth of the situation became irritatingly clear. In the context of this surprise incursion, the enemy’s wild manoeuvre with the bulk lifter made sense. Its primary purpose had not been to carve a hole in the Sautekh lines at all. It had been a feint, designed to tempt Obyron away from Zahndrekh and into a close-quarters fray, leaving his master vulnerable. And he had been ready to play right into it. Until Zahndrekh had commanded him to stay, that is. Another happy accident of nemesorial whimsy, Obyron thought to himself, suspecting the exact opposite.

			Switching his scry to one of the warriors wired into the barge, he watched the assassin creep forwards across the deck, thinking itself undetected. And indeed, to the muted consciousness of the barge’s retinue of troops, it was. But Obyron, peering through their oculars, could see it well enough. The human was slight, moving with an odd, liquid gait. And there, affixed to its arm, was the unmistakable glint of a C’tan phase blade. Ah, thought Obyron, retrieving a name from the suite of low-grade engrams he reserved for alien concepts, a Callidus. This would be good sport indeed: the Callidus creatures were fast even by his reckoning, and – alone among humans – were arrogant enough to make use of the blades forged by the necrontyr’s ancient former masters.

			In the old days, such a blasphemous intrusion on royal ground would have made Obyron bristle, but he had seen too many such transgressions over the years to really care any more. Indeed, this would be his sixth Callidus, if his engrams were to be trusted.

			‘What should we do about this damnable robot business, then?’ queried Zahndrekh, tapping metal fingertips on the prow rail as he observed the fight below. The question was directed at Obyron, but he knew he was not expected to answer – he had ever been the silent partner in the nemesor’s thought process.

			Zahndrekh continued.

			‘See, their troops are concentrated in the shadow of the wreck. We could always pull back, let them overextend themselves. Or perhaps we should keep their backs to the steel, and see how much they’ll commit to the foothold. What do you think, old friend?’ As Zahndrekh spoke, the assassin stalked forwards, tight as a coiled spring, just paces away from pouncing range.

			For a brief, wild moment, Obyron entertained madness. What if he were to let the human stalk three more steps, and leap? He would never have to hear the anecdote about Uttu Prime ever again, or have to sit through another joyless banquet, pretending to enjoy wine from a chalice that had been dry half of eternity. He might even, at long last, see realisation dawn in the nemesor’s eyes, as the assassin’s blade sunk in. Would it be worth it all, just to see the old general wake up to reality at last?

			But even as he thought this, his warscythe was in his hand, and aglow. Without Zahndrekh to endure, he was not Obyron. And so, for once, he answered his master.

			‘Let them commit, my lord,’ he said, in his doleful husk of a voice. ‘Let them feel victory is within reach… then take everything from them.’

			The assassin’s head snapped round at the sound of Obyron’s voice, and he exploded forwards, warscythe sweeping in a wide arc. The human dived into his strike, shunting his weapon aside with its own, and the impact of the phase blades rattled the cracks between dimensions.

			As the vargard spun round from the impact, the assassin kicked out at his forearm with a force that would have shattered ceramite, but barely challenged Obyron’s balance. If anything, it was remarkable the mortal’s leg stayed in one piece. Still, the slight offset in his equilibrium was enough to buy the creature time for another attack, and in came the phase blade.

			Obyron let the strike connect, shaving a strip from his thorax as he swivelled to face the assassin once more. And then he paced backwards, inviting another lunge. He even drew back his scythe, holding it overhead in the ancient form known as the spearfisher’s poise. Sure enough, the human came forwards, swiping at him piecemeal as it weaved around the shadow of his blade. Each cut carved a new silver gash in his necrodermis, but it mattered little. His body would repair itself in seconds; the assassin’s would not. He would only need to connect once.

			Zahndrekh, being Zahndrekh, had not even looked around, so engrossed was he in his pondering of antiquated tactics. From the sounds of it, he was trying to recall an amusing mnemonic from his youth.

			‘Ah yes!’ said the nemesor, with a satisfied sigh. ‘That was it – Take a drubbing, let them advance… wait for the moment… seize your chance! And I do believe this is our moment, dear vargard. Signal the Doomsday batteries to fire on the wreck, and let’s be done with this.’

			‘As you wish,’ answered Obyron, wishing he had teeth to grit, as the assassin made a feint and dived sideways, hoping to get between him and his master. It was tempting to channel his frustration into a flurry of blows there and then, but he hadn’t kept Zahndrekh alive this long by acting rashly. So he cast an interstitial command to the batteries as ordered, and circled round to face off against the interloper once again.

			As the human ducked in and out of his range, slicing shards from his body, Obyron found – to his profound irritation – that he had the nemesor’s accursed rhyme in his head. Take a drubbing… he thought, as he felt the distant rumble of the guns charging. Let them advance… wait for your moment…

			And there it was. The human’s ankle wobbled on a chunk of loose stone – an imbalance so small mortal eyes would have missed it. But living death had its advantages, Obyron supposed. Quick as a striking snake, his scythe came down, driving straight through the assassin’s leg and pinning it to the floor. In the same instant, the Doomsday cannons fired, drenching the sky with actinic light as the wreck below was obliterated.

			Releasing his grip on the scythe, Obyron switched his oculars to wavelengths far beneath the visible, and surged forwards onto the assassin. Blinded by the artillery’s fury, the creature was helpless to avoid his backhand swipe, and fell to the deck with its chest half-flattened. Obyron slowed his chronosense, allowing himself the briefest instant to savour his victory, before bringing his heel down onto the assassin’s head. A second stamp saw the skull crack, and a third smashed it flat in a gush of blood. It was the death it deserved.

			‘A brilliant stratagem as ever, my liege,’ rumbled Obyron, once the echoes of the explosion had begun to fade.

			‘Well, quite,’ answered the nemesor, pleased with himself, as he peered over the prow rail at the inferno below. ‘Now come, and let’s watch the fire together.’

			With a rare sigh of his own, Obyron picked up the carcass of the interloper – he couldn’t allow it to stain the royal barge any longer than necessary, after all – and trudged over to his master. As he dumped the body over the rail into the conflagration far below, Zahndrekh gave him a queer, sidelong look, and chuckled to himself.

			‘Glad you stayed?’

			Obyron did not need to reply.





Two


			While it was neither the largest nor the most heavily armed vessel in Sautekh space, Nemesor Zahndrekh’s flagship, the Cairn-class tomb ship Yama, certainly had the most sumptuous banqueting facilities. The nemesor took considerable pride in what he insisted on calling the Yama’s ‘famous hospitality’, and an embarrassingly significant portion of the vessel’s interior was taken up with gloomy kitchens and sculleries, where not so much as a morsel had been seen since the War in Heaven. These halls were patrolled by legions of cooks, servants and food tasters: glum husks possessed of less wit even than warriors, with no work to do and an eternity to do it in.

			And here, at the apex of this purposeless warren, was the nemesor’s great feasting chamber – a soaring vault of emerald and silver, whose singularity-forged crystal windows offered a panoramic view of the conquered world below them. Its ring-shaped table was inlaid with mosaics of Zahndrekh’s most famous victories; in each image, the oculars of the troops gleamed with precious stones seized from the world they had conquered. To a being who could appreciate such things, the chamber would have been near-indescribably beautiful. Scanning the grim faces sat around the table, however, Obyron permitted himself the amusement of considering who wanted to be there least.

			It was not Zahndrekh. He was in full flow, goblet in hand, holding forth about his successes on the campaign. Soon after the victory on the plain, the enemy’s primary forge had been shattered, and after that the Imperial capital. The feint with the lifter and the assassin had turned out to be the humans’ last gasp of ingenuity, and Zahndrekh had been disappointed to encounter no more surprises thereafter. With every major world in the system now in Sautekh hands, all that remained was to burn out the last vestiges of resistance among the moons and asteroids. Zahndrekh called this phase of a campaign the ‘epilogue’, and would generally spend it writing awful poetry and throwing victory dinners, while the soldiery mopped up. And so the nemesor at least was happy.

			It might have been Lord Batregh, sat eighty-three degrees round the table, with fury radiating from his death mask like radiation from stellar cinders. Broad and ash-blackened, Batregh had awoken from the great sleep outraged at having lost his good looks and charisma, and pitied himself mightily. But as far as Obyron could remember, he’d never possessed much of either. He’d certainly not lost his sense of entitlement, though: Batregh came from a grander house even than Zahndrekh, and was forever waiting for the day the nemesor would show himself up as an incompetent. He dreamed of the battle where Zahndrekh would make his fatal mistake and leave the way clear for him to take his rightful place on Gidrim’s throne – and each time it didn’t happen, he fell deeper into bitterness. Adding insult to injury, Batregh had also been in command of the thirteenth decurion, which had suffered six per cent recall failure after being wiped out by the crash of the lifter. He himself had been half blown apart during the fight – and reassembly rarely brightened anyone’s mood.

			It might have been Lord Akhenik, sat bolt upright opposite Zahndrekh, and clutching his empty goblet tightly enough to leave dents in the metal. The gaunt noble also considered himself Gidrim’s rightful lord, but unlike Batregh, he wasn’t waiting on Zahndrekh for an opportunity to take the throne. Perhaps it had been coincidence that his deathmark snipers had been deployed so peculiarly during the battle of Tobos III, at the start of the campaign. Then again, perhaps it hadn’t. Either way, Obyron had been sadly unable to prevent the accidental overloading of their transport’s engines, before any of them had accidentally shot Zahndrekh. Akhenik was perhaps even more incensed than Batregh, as his decurion had been the one sent in to contain the Mechanicus advance right before the Doomsday battery had fired, and had suffered even graver losses.

			Then there was Lord Kethyst, who had been a keen duellist in life, and retained all of his scars, carved into his necrodermis with belligerent pride. Kethyst hardly even pretended to conceal his plots any more. Indeed, Obyron noted he had brought two barely concealed blades to the feast, and Kethyst was giving him a look that suggested he didn’t care all that much that the vargard knew. Perhaps Lord Arbaketh, who had recently lost a legion of glyph-cracked immortals as mysteriously as he had acquired them. He clearly wasn’t too pleased either. Or Lord Penthehn, with his odd fascination for bombs. The list went on.

			In truth, all the lords around the flagship’s table were fuming to be there, because it meant Zahndrekh had won glory yet again, and they still hadn’t managed to remove him. The nemesor, needless to say, was blissfully unaware – he thought the lords were his friends and drinking companions, just as he thought there was fresh meat piled on the dusty platter before him. But there was as little love in this room as there was nourishment. It was a feast attended only by ghosts.

			Obyron was about to conclude that he himself was the room’s most miserable occupant – since his duty meant he couldn’t afford to speed his chronosense and skip the speeches – when a small, choked sound drew his attention to the seat he was standing behind.

			Oh, thought Obyron, of course. There was always someone worse off than oneself: in this case, it was the Imperial governor. Zahndrekh had captured it when the capitol spire had fallen, and – thinking it to be necrontyr – had insisted on treating it as an honoured guest until its ransom was paid.

			The human was out of its mind with fear. It couldn’t understand why it wasn’t dead, and why it was sat at a foodless banquet with towering iron ghouls, who were speaking a language it had no hope of comprehending. And now, one of the chamber’s scarabs had taken an interest in it, clicking its mandibles from its empty plate, and it couldn’t keep the madness inside any more. Obyron might have pitied the thing, were it not vermin.

			‘Are you quite all right, my good man?’ asked Zahndrekh, pausing to turn to the governor. ‘Bugs being a little overzealous in cleaning your leftovers, what? Ha! Pay them no mind, old Zahndrekh wouldn’t deny you a good feed… even despite your poor form on the field.’

			Not comprehending Zahndrekh’s words, and seeing only a glowering cadaver turn to it with flashing eyes, the governor turned deathly pale, and Obyron’s olfactory transducers told him it had voided its bowels. At the rate its heart was beating, Obyron began to wonder if the creature would die on the spot, untouched. But Zahndrekh carried on, too engrossed in his own speech to be concerned long with his guest’s odd behaviour.

			At last, as Zahndrekh’s oratory threatened to extend into its third hour, Obyron was saved: a projection was coming through to the chamber’s orbuculum. Scrying the interstitial receivers, Obyron was surprised by the power in the message’s seal – it bore the sigils of the crownworld Mandragora. The missive could only be coming from one source: the Stormlord Imotekh himself.

			Most nemesors wouldn’t dream of taking a projection of such importance in public – the political advantage conferred to rivals would be far too great. But most nemesors weren’t Zahndrekh, thought Obyron wearily. And Zahndrekh had a loyal vargard to do all his worrying for him. And so he called for the orbuculum at the table’s centre to be activated, and the chamber dropped into deep darkness.

			The Stormlord’s eyes became visible first, cold green embers glaring down from the chamber’s apex as the connection assembled itself from interstitial whispers. The signal strengthened, and the phaeron’s shape grew more distinct: a vast and terrible form sketched in shivering chrysoprase. For a while the colossus stood in forbidding silence, until audio resolved itself. Out of the crackling interstitial static grew the low howling of wind, swelling occasionally with bursts of distant gauss fire. The sound of war. If Lord Imotekh was hailing them from the midst of his own campaign, this was a matter of some urgency.

			For a moment, the phaeron’s gaze flickered to the human governor, but it did not linger – Imotekh was well aware of Zahndrekh’s madness, and would often let these minor absurdities go unremarked. Even so, a king’s tolerance was not a thing to be tested, and Obyron winced at the way his nemesor greeted his lord. He could only presume the old general thought himself drunk on imaginary wine.

			‘Ah, my king!’ toasted Zahndrekh as he stood up, with a flourish of his goblet that would have slopped drink on the floor, were there any to spill. ‘A rare pleasure. Do you see, Stormlord, I have gifted you another world?’

			Even in the ancient days, such overfamiliarity would have been dangerous. And nobody, least of all the phaeron, had grown softer in an eternity of living death. But if their king was wrathful, he did not show it. An arch-pragmatist, he had long accepted that whatever was wrong with the nemesor could not be fixed – and that it mattered little, so long as he was still winning wars.

			‘I see,’ said the Stormlord, in a voice like solar carrion tearing round a black hole. His words seemed to suck all sound from the room, and Zahndrekh’s composure stiffened rapidly. Mad he may have been, but royal instincts went far deeper than engrammatic damage, and he knew better than to act the fool now.

			‘My most abject apologies for any frivolity in my manner, my king,’ said Zahndrekh, lowering his gaze and dipping to one knee. ‘It has been a long campaign, and I may have perhaps taken too much liberty in celebrating. My only wish is that–’

			‘Enough,’ commanded the Stormlord, with the slightest twitch of his clawlike hand. Without a word, the matter was dismissed. ‘You have done well. But there is no time for rest, nemesor – further work awaits you. I require a… troubled dynasty returned to the fold, and your experience recommends you to the task.’

			Something about the phaeron’s words alarmed Obyron on a level he could not quite parse. Knowing Zahndrekh’s foibles, the Stormlord would often frame his conquests in terms of crushing rebellions against fellow necrontyr, as that was how the nemesor would inevitably see them. But the word ‘troubled’ – and the way the phaeron had flashed a meaningful glance at Obyron as he said it – had given him pause. Something here was different.

			‘Go now to the place I will indicate to your vargard, and bring with you a force nimble enough to deploy immediately, yet equipped for the heaviest resistance. Take none of your subordinate lords. At the staging point you will meet with an old ally, and together you will go forth and bring me victory. Do not let illusions cloud your vision, nemesor, and do not fail me.’

			With that, the Stormlord’s image faded from the air, and light returned to the chamber. There was a long pause as the lords around the table exchanged glances, attempting to calculate what this meant for them – with Zahndrekh away, they would be left to prosecute the remains of this war between them, and an almighty squabbling would ensue. At last, the nemesor broke the silence.

			‘Splendid!’ he proclaimed, clapping his hands with a clang and a shower of sparks. ‘I hope you will all forgive me for cutting short the festivities, but it transpires I have another war to attend to. Before I go, however, it is only right that we toast the magnanimity of our grand king. My lords?’

			In deathly silence, the seething nobles rose to their feet, and extended their empty goblets with expressions of unconcealed hatred.

			‘To the glory of the Stormlord Imotekh,’ cried Zahndrekh, ‘Phaeron of the Sautekh dynasty, taker of one trillion hands and master of three hundred thousand suns. And to a successful hunt for your beloved nemesor. May our enemies tremble!’

			Only Zahndrekh pretended to drink, but he made every appearance of enjoying it, as he made a deep hum of satisfaction before tossing his goblet aside for the scarabs, and sweeping from the chamber.

			After the nemesor left, Obyron stood there for a time, looking silently at the lords as they glared back at him. Though they knew very well that the vargard would be able to scry in and hear their arguments from anywhere on the flagship, there was no way they’d give him the satisfaction of beginning while he was in the room. Like a pack of beaten hounds, they might despise each other, but they despised him more. No matter, thought Obyron, so long as they knew who held the chain.

			At last, before turning to follow his master, Obyron remembered the governor – he would have to ensure the creature choked unfortunately on its food before his departure. But as he put his hand on the mortal’s feeble body, its head lolled back, purple and lifeless. It appeared the thing’s heart had given out, in the end. Good; the corpse would be another indignity for the nobles to bicker over.

			As Obyron followed him down the long passage to his quarters, Zahndrekh ran through a rambling inventory of his forces, like a young noble choosing which beasts to take on a jolly hunt.

			‘Nimble yet heavy… What do you make of that, old friend? I’m thinking light cruisers for a start, with maybe a Scythe-class or two for good measure. Cairns will be too ponderous, I feel, so we can’t take this old brute,’ Zahndrekh slapped one of the Yama’s bulkheads with affection as they passed, ‘but the Horaktys and the Tephnyt could be perfect flagships, eh?’

			Obyron offered nothing but his presence, as he was too busy looking over the coordinates sent to him from Mandragora following the Stormlord’s projection. The nearest world to their staging point was a barren rock called Doahht, alone in orbit around a dim red star. It had once been a tomb world, but all records of its founding dynasty were lost, and who knew what dwelled there now. The vargard suspected nothing good, as Doahht was in the depths of the m’wt, the region of dim, dying light on the far eastern fringe which the humans called the Ghoul Stars.

			His people were far too old to be superstitious – and in any case, what haunting did it make sense for the dead to fear? Even so, the m’wt was not a place to enter lightly. There were whole worlds there ravaged by the flayer curse, and far worse beside: things so weird they confounded even the most learned of the crypteks. And they were being sent there with the sparsest instructions, and only the promise of an ‘old ally’ for support. What could the Stormlord have meant? Obyron knew of very few true allies left to the nemesor, and certainly none based in those desolate reaches of space. Indeed, the only dynastic presence he knew of in the m’wt was the Bone Kingdom of Drazak, desmesne of the foul king Valgul. And they would find little friendship there.

			Obyron had shared their destination with his master, but his trepidation was clearly not shared: Zahndrekh was now perusing projections of his forces, as if selecting robes for a feast.

			‘Nimble… hmm. Tomb blades are a must… and doom scythes, naturally. Perhaps a wing or two of night shrouds, even? Alas, if agility is the order of the day, I suppose our old friends the doomsday arks are out of the question, and I certainly shan’t be able to play with the megalith again. More’s the pity. Annihilation barges, though… they’re nimble enough. And a seraptek cohort or three will more than make up for any deficiency in firepower, without sacrificing speed…’

			Feeling it was time to make at least a token contribution to Zahndrekh’s thoughts, Obyron grunted in assent, while continuing to chew on the Stormlord’s orders. That word, ‘troubled’, kept rising to the surface of his mind. Which of their many enemies could Imotekh have meant? Over long years, Obyron had come to understand the various meanings behind the things the Stormlord said to Zahndrekh. A ‘reckless’ dynasty to be suppressed meant a war against the green-skinned barbarians known as the orks, while a ‘stubborn’ dynasty meant the elite parahumans who called themselves the Adeptus Astartes. But never before had he used the word ‘troubled’.

			There was only one thing Obyron could take it to mean, and he very much hoped he was wrong. Because even at the suggestion of the thought, he experienced a feeling so unfamiliar that he was only just beginning to recognise it for what it was: fear.





Three


			The staging post was as dismal as anywhere could be – a great shattered crescent of stone, birthed from the sundering of a planet during the wild dying days of the War in Heaven, and orphaned by the obliteration of its sun. A tombstone for a star system. Obyron wondered if there was any poetic symmetry to his people being marshalled for war here, being themselves grim remnants of the same cataclysm, but he had never had the head for that sort of thing, even when he had possessed a soul.

			He did know it was dark. Behind him hung the green constellations of the nemesor’s war fleet, stationary in the freezing void, while ahead was the m’wt: a tattered veil of dying orbs, beyond which was only extragalactic night. Only by amplifying his oculars could the vargard make out the weak light of Doahht’s star at all, and even then it was a feeble presence, a flickering red candle in an infinite night.

			‘Bit chilly out,’ remarked Zahndrekh from behind him, as they trudged across the world-shard’s dust. Although there wasn’t an atom of atmosphere here to carry sound, the nemesor was speaking with his audio projectors anyway, and Obyron wouldn’t have heard him at all had he not thought to activate their carrier wave link.

			‘Yes, my lord,’ agreed Obyron, wishing he had forgotten to do so. ‘It is cold, indeed. But look, we’re almost there.’ A boulder field lay ahead – the worn remnants of ancient standing stones – lit by a single beacon of green tomb-light. This was the rendezvous point where they were due to meet their old ally, and where Obyron was curious to discover what friends they had left. Rarely an optimist, he held his warscythe ready.

			But when they arrived, the circle of boulders was empty, save for the silent light of the beacon. As they waited, Zahndrekh passed the time by kneeling to inspect the worn glyphs still visible on the old stones. The nemesor fancied himself as something of a historian, which he was, if one didn’t count the last sixty million years of time. Obyron, meanwhile, kept his eye on the shadows. Surely, Imotekh would not have ordered them all this way just to have them eliminated, when there had been so many willing daggers back on the flagship? Even so, he was wary. As well as his own oculars, he had a low-level scry cast by the fleet’s sensors, ready to expand to full band if they saw even a grain of dust shift on the world-shard’s surface. Nobody was going to creep up on them without him seeing them first.

			As such, the vargard was surprised – to say the least – when he saw something scuttle rapidly between the circle’s outer stones. It had been the briefest glimpse, but something about the serpentine motion was sickeningly resonant, speaking to a memory burned so deep in his engrammatic pathways that it took a moment to bring it to light. A moment too long, it occurred to Obyron, as Zahndrekh cried out behind him.

			Spinning round with his scythe aglow, he was presented with a tableau that would have filled him with dread, were he not too focused on the fight to come. Looking down on Zahndrekh from atop the stone he had been inspecting was a vile serpentine creature that must have been twenty kubits in length: bone-pale, with a cluster of ice-blue eyes and squirming, bladed limbs at its fore. The thing reared up in a sinuous arch, mandibles spread, and Obyron roared for the nemesor to get back, charging to put himself between his master and the beast. But Zahndrekh did not move.

			‘Sepa!’ cried the nemesor, as the beast lunged forwards, and with some enthusiasm, he began patting it on the head. Obyron skidded to a halt in the grit, his circumspection routines collapsing in a failure cascade as the creature began to nuzzle Zahndrekh. As if he could be confounded further, a second creature now came bounding over the rocks, undulating on two dozen razor-clawed legs, and knocked his master to the floor.

			‘Sata! Dear Sata!’ shouted Zahndrekh, booming with laughter, as he tussled with the writhing horror, and the other beast slunk down to bat its slithering feelers against the nemesor’s face. As the absurd scene played out, recognition began to crystallise at last in Obyron’s mind. These were not some ghastly spectres of the m’wt; they were heralds of something worse.

			Resigned to what he knew he would see there, Obyron turned slowly back to face the centre of the circle. And sure enough, there he was, casually inspecting the immaculate cream plating of one hand by the light of the beacon.

			‘Hello, vargard,’ said Setekh.

			Of all their people – at least of those who had made it through the great sleep – only Setekh had known Zahndrekh longer than Obyron. Born half the galaxy apart, but into the same elite echelon of nobility, they had met at one of their people’s most celebrated military academies, where they had both been sent away to study.

			Even now, Zahndrekh would all too frequently regale Obyron with tales of his days there, which in many ways he saw as the best of his life. To Obyron, it sounded dreadful: a sweltering pressure chamber of ambition, betrayal and impossibly cruel pranks, disguised as fun and camaraderie by a veneer of fine wines and brash laughter. But then, Obyron had been born a soldier and not a noble, and so tended to assume he just didn’t have the breeding to understand such delights.

			In any case, Setekh had become simultaneously Zahndrekh’s most bitter rival and his closest confidant – closer even than a brother, as the nemesor told it. And while Zahndrekh had been unmatched in his mastery of the battlefield, Setekh had excelled in the warfare of the mind – propaganda, espionage, and the manipulation of psychological weakness.

			After winning their commissions, the two young nobles had each been given an army, and sent off to fight in the swamps of Yama, during the bloody feuding of the Wars of Succession. This had been the campaign where Obyron, already a veteran, had been assigned to Zahndrekh as his vargard, and he had stood guard at many a feast thrown by the two young officers. He had watched them spar together, hunt together, and roar with laughter together as they celebrated victory after remarkable victory. He had seen them bicker and argue over maps, and watched on as, deep in their cups, they had pledged eternal loyalty to one another.

			But he had also seen the way Setekh spoke about Zahndrekh to the other lords when he wasn’t there, and the look in his eyes as Zahndrekh told Setekh his secrets. More than once, he had seen him use information given in the confidence of the feasting tent to snatch victories in the light of the next day. And at last, on the eve of the battle that would win the war on Yama, he had been there as Setekh finally acted on his plot to kill Zahndrekh. That time, he had resolved to do more than watch.

			Setekh’s instruments had been his twin skolopendra hunting beasts: the very same pair now filling the interstices with their chittering as they roughhoused with his master. They had been flesh then, rather than the canoptek constructs which now housed their minds – but they had been no less lethal. Obyron had found them creeping through the marsh towards the back entrance to the royal tent, and only his skill with a blade had driven them off. Even then, it had been a close thing, and to this day Obyron’s metal body remembered the wounds their mandibles had inflicted on its prior form.

			Of course, Setekh had covered his tracks well enough that Obyron could prove nothing, and in the morning his wounds had been laughed off as the result of some nocturnal misadventure. Then had come the battle, and the triumph, and Obyron had never breathed a word of the assassination attempt to his master.

			For many years afterwards, he had told himself it was a matter of protocol. Clearly, for a soldier of his caste to accuse a noble of treason was tantamount to suicide. When that excuse had worn thin beneath the grindstone of his conscience, he had told himself that Zahndrekh would never have believed his word anyway, against that of Setekh. Finally, he had accepted the truth: he had not told Zahndrekh because he knew the truth would destroy him.

			In time, the silence had become easier to keep. After Yama, Zahndrekh had been given the world of Gidrim, and his path had split from that of Setekh. The last the vargard heard, during the madness of the War in Heaven, was that the other officer had slaughtered his father and so seized his dynastic throne for himself. Then had come the horror of biotransference, and the apocalyptic lunacy that followed it, and after that the great sleep.

			Obyron had been one of the first on Gidrim to wake from slumber, many years before Zahndrekh, and spent his long solitude learning all he could about what had come to pass, so as to best prepare his master for the galaxy he would be waking into. He had soaked himself in the growing tide of information reaching the senses of the awakening tomb complex, and naturally, he had searched for news of Setekh’s fate. It had been with some relief that he had discovered the noble’s crownworld had been cracked open by a supernova some thirty million years previously, and so he had put the whole business behind him, where it belonged.

			But then here was Setekh, attended by his awful beasts, at the grim edge of the galaxy. And they were to fight together again.

			‘Zahndrekh, you stupid old bastard!’ said Setekh, in a voice as smooth as his bone-coloured necrodermis, ‘stop mucking about with the hounds and come and embrace me. It’s been too long.’

			‘Setekh!’ replied the nemesor, getting up and brushing the dust from himself. ‘I’d heard you were dead, you wily devil – is there no pickle you can’t slip out of? Well met indeed!’ The two nobles embraced with a clatter of plating, and Obyron looked away rather than see the smirk Setekh would be giving him over his master’s shoulder.

			‘Why, you don’t look like you’ve aged a day,’ said Zahndrekh, in mock exasperation, before gesturing at Setekh’s staff. ‘I see you’re still using the same old stick, too.’

			A nemesor’s staff was a crucial signifier of rank, engraved with symbolic designs and glyphic records of the bearer’s standing. Usually, it was a matter of grievous insult for a noble to commission a staff too similar to any other, but on winning their commissions, the two young officers had decided to commission matching weapons as a mark of brotherhood. And indeed, save for the blue light blazing from its power core, in contrast to Zahndrekh’s green, Setekh’s was identical.

			‘Oh, this old thing? Yes, I suppose I never did get round to replacing it with something better,’ said Setekh, before nodding to Obyron. ‘Speaking of which, I see you’re still keeping that old lump hanging about the place, eh?’ At this, Zahndrekh barked with laughter.

			‘Ha! Quite! Well, one has to have something around to get in the way of the enemy’s spears, what?’

			Obyron could not object on grounds of protocol, as this was the standard fashion by which officers discussed lower-caste necrontyr. Despite all his accomplishments – he had been decorated seven times with the Order of the Tomb Fly, and granted a sepulchral chamber larger than those of minor lords – he would forever be just a soldier. He had not been born in the same universe as Zahndrekh and Setekh. And yet still, especially given the irony of Zahndrekh’s jibe, it hurt.

			‘I see age hasn’t dulled the edge of your banter, brother. But let’s hope your blade remains as sharp – we’ve got a war to win, you know.’

			‘So I hear,’ said Zahndrekh, conspiratorially. ‘Damned separatists again, from the sounds of it. When will they learn? And this lot must be particularly dense, if they’re going up against the two of us! It’ll be just like Yama all over again, hmm?’

			‘Quite, Zahndrekh, quite. Just like that.’

			‘Well then,’ said Zahndrekh, with his customary clap, ‘shall we get down to it? Assuming you’ve brought an army, that is. I don’t want to make things awkward, but if it’s just you, Sepa and Sata joining us – magnificent beasts though they are – I’d dare say you’re not pulling your weight.’

			Setekh said nothing in reply. He simply raised one hand, clicked his fingers, and the night filled with stars. Suddenly, where there had been nothing but the gloom of the galactic fringe, there was an armada at least the size of the nemesor’s own, blazing with lights as cold and blue as Setekh’s eyes.

			If nothing else, this explained how Setekh and his beasts had approached the beacon undetected – clearly they were using some form of cloaking hex. But while it was a simple matter to confound the senses of the galaxy’s more primitive inhabitants, Obyron had yet to encounter a glamour potent enough to hide things from necrontyr oculars. It troubled him deeply – and the sly glance Setekh gave him, as Zahndrekh marvelled at the sky like a child at a conjurer’s trick, suggested the other noble knew this all too well.

			‘Marvellous, Setekh, simply marvellous,’ gasped Zahndrekh. ‘You never cease to amaze. I shouldn’t have doubted you. I shall have to go and prepare my troops for inspection, so as to be sure we’re not overshadowed. Perhaps we’ll meet on the morrow, to plot our opening moves?’

			‘Indeed, brother, I shall look forward to it.’ There followed a long series of fond farewells, which Obyron waited patiently through, before finally speaking up as Zahndrekh prepared to depart.

			‘I will follow shortly, my nemesor, after sharing our interstitial protocols with Setekh. I’m sure that he’ll need the correct freq–’

			‘Zahndrekh!’ exclaimed Setekh, interrupting him. ‘Your spearcatcher seems to be talking – and what’s more, it seems to presume my needs? I’m sure it means well, but it does rather appear to have forgotten its manners. Go on, vargard, run along.’

			Zahndrekh paused, clearly uncomfortable, but if he was considering contradicting Setekh, he clearly thought better of it.

			‘Yes, Obyron,’ he murmured, ‘come along. There’s much to be done.’

			Shooting one last look at Setekh, Obyron followed his master. He’d have to wait to get the answers he wanted, but that was all right. He was good at waiting.

